# unbound-manual
The Official Unbound User Manual, published at [unbound.docs.nlnetlabs.nl](https://unbound.docs.nlnetlabs.nl/).


## Style Guide

This manual uses British English. Since there is quite a bit of leeway in
English style, we use the [European Commission’s English Style Guide] as
guidance.

[European Commission’s English Style Guide]: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/styleguide_english_dgt_en.pdf


## Building locally

The documentation here relies on [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org) which is
a documentation generator written in Python.

You would need the packages/versions listed in [requirements.txt](requirements.txt) either in your system or in your Python environment (recommended) like:
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```


## The Unbound submodule

This repository has the Unbound source repository as a submodule.
This is mainly done in order for the manpages to live authoritatively next to
the code they are documenting.

### Working with the submodule

When first cloning this repository you would need to additionally do:
```
git submodule update --init

```
and everytime after you pull new changes.

Or break out of your muscle memory and use:
```
git clone --recurse-submodules ...
```
when first cloning this repository, and:
```
git pull --recurse-submodules
```
when pulling in changes.

### Generating updated manpages

When the manpages of the Unbound source are updated, this repository's Unbound
submodule needs to point to the new version.
Checkout the relevant tag/branch/commit and commit the change.

The manpages can then be generated by running:
```
make man
```
The manpages will be generated in `build/man`.
